# Notes: March 17, 2020
My notes from the last time I was actively working on this say that we will need to version paths. The idea is that any update to how a path resolves would tag a new version.

## Why do we need this?
Tracking updates to paths is useful for identifying the system state at the end of the build. The idea was that rebuilding should only repeat a command if its dependencies (including paths) are not in the state they were left after the last build. So, if a command uses a path, then another command unlinks that path, we do not rerun the first command because a later version of its input path is still in place.

## Is this necessary?
I tried a slightly simpler approach before, tracking just the paths used for each command rather than trying to version them across commands. When we're deciding whether or not to run a command, we look at its input paths and check to see if they resolve the same way they did before the last build. If not, rerun the command. The problem with this approach is that the effect of the build itself could change those paths, meaning a rebuild after touching nothing would still run commands. This seems like an invariant we would not want to violate, though nailing down the exact requirements for what should trigger a rebuild seems important here.

What if we just keep track of the paths each command uses, but at the end of the build we look back at each command's paths to see the final state they're left in? That may work. I'll have to think about whether it could give a meaningfully different result in some situation.

## Dealing with complexity
If versioning paths really is necessary, there's a complicating detail related to directories that we'll need to figure out. If a path is created, that is also a modification to the containing directory's contents. Does that mean we should actually think of path manipulation as modification to directory nodes in the build graph? That wouldn't be great, because it means we would be sequencing updates to directories that are actually independent (e.g. command A creates file a, command B creates file b. These appear as a sequence of read/write operations on directory .).

One option would be to return to the idea of versioning directory entries as sub-parts of directories. Commands could reference and update entries, which would be contained in a directory. Commands could also reference a directory if they list its contents, but direct updates to a directory would not be possible. This could work, but it would *not* capture whether a command references a directory entry using a relative or absolute path. That could be important.

***We already can't rely on distinguishing absolute and relative paths. A command can always read the `PWD` environment variable to construct absolute paths from relative paths. I remember from some early testing that this is common.***

## Other Thoughts
Nailing down the right way to handle paths seems to hinge on a really clear understanding of what the build process should be. Here are some characteristics of the build algorithm that seem like reasonable requirements:

1. If I do nothing after a build finishes, a rebuild should do no work.
2. If I delete an output file (never read by any command) after a build, the rebuild should restore that file without running any commands.