# Notes: March 18, 2020
Goals for today:
1. Make a decision about path tracking
2. Do some quick testing with tracing code to make sure path tracking makes sense
3. Sketch out an object model for the final tracking approach
4. Start on implementation of final tracking approach

## Make a decision about path tracking
Issues to consider when weighing options:

1. Make sure a simple build/rebuild works (e.g. `gcc -o program a.c b.c`)
2. Think about how build/rebuild works for wildcards (e.g. `gcc -o program *.c`) when the output file is added.
3. Consider build steps that link or unlink files
4. What happens if we have to rerun a command that depends on a file that was later unlinked? What if it depends on the *absence* of a file that was later created?
5. Develop a list of unsupported cases:
  a. No support for relocating the build directory
  b. Forget about chroot for now, though it doesn't seem like an invasive change to add it later.

### Option 1: Forget about final file and path states
Every command depends on a set of path states of the following form:
- Path W resolves to a file F when opened rw- (input/output on file F is handled separately)
- Path X does NOT resolve when opened rw-
- Path Y does NOT resolve when opened r-x
- Path Z resolves to a file F when opened rw- trunc creat

On a rebuild, we will rerun a command if *any* of its path dependencies would resolve differently (e.g. a failed resolution now resolves, or vice versa). After resolving paths to files, we would also rerun a command if any of its input files' contents have changed.

This works great for a simple build. A wildcard build has one downside: the wildcard corresponds to a read of the current directory, and the directory contents will change after the first build. Once we can recognize and skip commands the downside goes away. That seems good enough, since kicking off `gcc` but not running any of its sub-tasks is no big deal.

If a build process changes its own inputs, rebuilds will always run. We can definitely warn the user about this, but we wouldn't be able to recognize that the build was left in its final state. If this turns out to be a problem in practice, we could later add a scan to record the final state of things. If *everything* from the last build is unchanged, we can skip the build entirely. If anything changes, just kick off a fresh build. We may do a little extra work, but command skipping limits that.