# Notes: March 24, 2020
Toying with the idea of dropping the build graph did not seem promising yesterday. Today's goal is to run some example builds on paper to try to clear up some confusing details related to path tracing.

Much of today's work turned into thinking about a language to express dependencies. I think this is going to be useful long-term, so I'm moving the documentation to docs/language.md.

## Test 1: Simple Build
Build a single source program with the following `Dodofile`:
```
gcc -o prog a.c
```

### Initial Build
**`Dodofile`**
- Depends on the contents of `Dodofile`:
  - Read access to `Dodofile`, save fingerprint
- Launches the `gcc` command below. This process creates a series of dependencies as it searches the path for `gcc`:
  - Execute access to `/`, entry `bin` succeeds
  - Execute access to `/bin/`, entry `gcc` fails with ENOENT
  - Execute access to `/`, entry `usr` succeeds
  - Execute access to `/usr/`, entry `bin` succeeds
  - Execute access to `/usr/bin`, entry `gcc` succeeds
  - Execute access to `/usr/bin/gcc` succeeds (no read, because we don't care about the contents)

Or, in the language documented in docs/langauge.md:
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `GET("gcc", GET("bin", /)) = ENOENT`
- `X(GET("gcc", GET("bin", GET("usr", /)))) = OK`

**`gcc -o prog a.c`** 
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `LINK(NEWFILE, "a.s", GET("tmp", /)) = OK`
- `LINK(NEWFILE, "a.o", GET("tmp", /)) = OK`
- `X(GET("cc1", GET("8", GET("x86_64-linux-gnu", GET("gcc", GET("lib", GET("usr", /))))))) = OK`
- `X(GET("as", GET("8", GET("x86_64-linux-gnu", GET("gcc", GET("lib", GET("usr", /))))))) = OK`
- `X(GET("collect2", GET("8", GET("x86_64-linux-gnu", GET("gcc", GET("lib", GET("usr", /))))))) = OK`
- `UNLINK("a.s", GET("tmp", /)) = OK`
- `UNLINK("a.o", GET("tmp", /)) = OK`

**`cc1 -o /tmp/a.s a.c`** 
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `R(GET("a.c", .)) = OK`
- `W(TRUNC(LINK_IF_NEEDED(NEWFILE, "a.s", GET("tmp", /)) = OK`

**`as -o /tmp/a.o /tmp/a.s`** 
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `R(GET("a.s", GET("tmp", /))) = OK`
- `W(TRUNC(LINK_IF_NEEDED(NEWFILE, "a.o", GET("tmp", /)))) = OK`

**`collect2 ...`** 
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `X(GET("ld", GET("8", GET("x86_64-linux-gnu", GET("gcc", GET("lib", GET("usr", /)))))))`
- A bunch of temporary files created and deleted but never used

**`ld -o prog /tmp/a.o ...`** 
- `R(EXE) = OK`
- `R(GET("a.o", GET("tmp", /))) = OK`
- `LINK(NEWFILE, "prog", .) = OK`
- `W(GET("prog", .) = OK`

#### Cross-Command Dependencies
Consider a two-command build, where command A creates and writes a file `foo`, and command B reads that file.
The command-independent operations look like this:
- **A:** `LINK(NEWFILE, "foo", .)`
- **A:** `W(GET("foo", .))`
- **B:** `R(GET("foo", .))`

Of course, there is a cross-command dependency here. A's first operation uses the initial state of the `.` directory, but its second operation uses the new version of `.` created by the first operation. Command B's read operation also looks at this new version of of `.`. The result of a read operation is the version that was read, which in this case would be the version created when A wrote to the file. We can expand these operations across commands. I'll denote a which command performed an action (or nest of actions) with the command name and curly braces. To find out which command performed an action, move outward until you find the first containing command block.

```
B{R(GET("foo", A{LINK(NEWFILE, "foo", .)}))} = A{W(GET("foo", LINK(NEWFILE, "foo", .)))}
```

This expression tells us: when B reads "foo" from the current directory, it finds an entry that was linked by A. The file contents B sees are a version written by A.

This doesn't quite work out if the same procedure was followed, except A and B use the file `./foo/bar`. How do we write down the version of the `foo` directory that had `bar` added to it by A?
