# Notes: March 19, 2020
Okay, lots of time spent thinking yesterday and not much time on coding. I'm 99% certain that the one option in yesterday's notes is going to work. Just look at paths used by each command, and rerun the command if any of its referenced paths resolve in a different way than they did on the previous build.

There are only two possible outcomes for path resolution: success and failure. Idempotent path resolution is easy to handle in this model too; opening a file with `O_CREAT | O_TRUNC` flags guarantees success (barring any permission errors).

## Operations on paths
The existing codebase doesn't handle an important aspect of dealing with paths that is going to be important going forward. This is assuming a model where each command interacts wiht paths, and we'll rerun the command on a rebuild if those interactions will yield different results.

Here's an example sequence of operations a command could run that causes a problem:
1. create file a.txt
2. open file a.txt
3. unlink file a.txt

These interactions have dependencies. Creating the file must happen before opening it or unlinking it. It's not enough to just look at the operations the command does to make sure they can still run. We need to consider that an operation may only be possible because of the effect of an earlier operation.

In the above case, we need to check to be sure it is possible for the command to create the file a.txt. The need to open or unlink this file is satisfied by its creation. We could think of these as demands percolating backward through the sequence of operations. To unlink the file, it must exist. The open operation does nothing to help with this, but the create does. Any requirements that percolate back to the beginning are requirements for the state of the system before the build starts. Only those requirements should be examined when deciding whether or not the command should rerun.

Here's another interesting scenario:
1. open file a.txt in read-only mode
2. open file a.txt in write-only mode

Both operations have requirements that percolate upward, so even though the file isn't opened read-write, that's the actual permission check we need to perform.

It's totally possible for one command to satisfy the requirements for another command's path interaction:
1. command A creates file at path X
2. command B opens file at path X

In that case we could potentially manage those interactions by replaying the effect of command A (by creating the file), but how do we know the file must be created? If path interactions for each command are tracked separately, this situation looks identical to one where command B tries to open a file that used to exist, but was deleted by the user.

There are also opportunities for interactions through paths that do not deal with file contents at all:
1. command A creates file at path X
2. command B unlinks file at path X
3. command A fails to open path X

We would need to identify this communication between commands the same way we detect it for file contents. That means we'll need to version paths and track them across command runs.
